# Let's Encrypt

This example includes a Docker Compose configuration file that you can
use to deploy [JupyterHub](https://github.com/jupyter/jupyterhub) with
TLS certificate and key files generated by [Let's Encrypt](https://letsencrypt.org).

The `docker-compose.yml` configuration file in this example extends the
JupyterHub service defined in the `docker-compose.yml` file in the root
directory of this repository.  

When you run the JupyterHub Docker container using the configuration
file in this directory, Docker mounts an additional volume containing
the Let's Encrypt TLS certificate and key files, and overrides the
`SSL_CERT` and `SSL_KEY` environment variables to point to these files.

## Create a secrets volume

This example stores the Let's Encrypt TLS certificate and key files in
a Docker volume, and mounts the volume to the JupyterHub container at
runtime.  

Create a volume to store the certificate and key files.

```
# Activate Docker machine where JupyterHub will run
eval "$(docker-machine env jupyterhub)"

docker volume create --name jupyterhub-secrets
```

## Generate Let's Encrypt certificate and key

Run the `letsencrypt.sh` script to create a TLS full-chain certificate
and key.  

The script downloads and runs the `letsencrypt` Docker image to create a
full-chain certificate and private key, and stores the files in a Docker
volume.  You must provide a valid, routable, fully-qualified domain name (you
must own it), and you must activate the Docker machine host that the domain
points to before you run this script.  You must also provide a valid email
address and the name of the volume you created above.

_Notes:_ The script hard codes several `letsencrypt` options, one of which
automatically agrees to the Let's Encrypt Terms of Service.

```
# Activate Docker machine where JupyterHub will run
eval "$(docker-machine env jupyterhub)"

./letsencrypt.sh \
  --domain myhost.mydomain \
  --email me@mydomain \
  --volume jupyterhub-secrets
```

## Run JupyterHub container

To run the JupyterHub container using the Let's Encrypt certificate and key,
set the `SECRETS_VOLUME` environment variable to the name of the Docker volume
containing the certificate and key files, and run `docker-compose` **from the
root directory** of this repository while specifying the `docker-compose.yml`
configuration in this directory:

```
export SECRETS_VOLUME=jupyterhub-secrets

docker-compose -f examples/letsencrypt/docker-compose.yml up -d
```
